---
layout: post
title: Basics and applications
subtitle: Restore previous system state
tags: [Pair, Iterator, Basics]
comments: true
---

> ## Pairs
>
> Before we come to iterators, let me say a few words about pairs. Pairs are widely used in STL. Simple problems, like TopCoder SRM 250 and easy 500-point problems, usually require some simple data structure that fits well with pair. STL std::pair is just a pair of elements. The simplest form would be the following:
>
> ````C++
>    template < typename T1, typename T2 > struct pair {
>    T1 first;
>    T2 second;
>    };
>     ```
>
>
> In general pair<int,int> is a pair of integer values. At a more complex level, pair<string, pair<int, int> > is a pair of string and two integers. In the second case, the usage may be like this:
>
> ``` C++
>    pair < string, pair < int, int > > P;
>    string s = P.first; // extract string
>    int x = P.second.first; // extract first int
>    int y = P.second.second; // extract second int
>     ```
>
>
> The great advantage of pairs is that they have built-in operations to compare themselves. Pairs are compared first-to-second element. If the first elements are not equal, the result will be based on the comparison of the first elements only; the second elements will be compared only if the first ones are equal. The array (or vector) of pairs can easily be sorted by STL internal functions.
>
> For example, if you want to sort the array of integer points so that they form a polygon, it’s a good idea to put them to the vector< pair<double, pair<int,int> >, where each element of vector is { polar angle, { x, y } }. One call to the STL sorting function will give you the desired order of points.
>
> Pairs are also widely used in associative containers, which we will speak about later in this article.
>
>
>
>
> ### Iterators
>
> What are iterators? In STL iterators are the most general way to access data in containers. Consider the simple problem: Reverse the array A of N int’s. Let’s begin from a C-like solution:
>
> ``` C++
> void reverse_array_simple(int * A, int N) {
>  int first = 0, last = N - 1; // First and last indices of elements to be swapped
>  while (first < last) { // Loop while there is something to swap
>    swap(A[first], A[last]); // swap(a,b) is the standard STL function
>    first++; // Move first index forward
>    last–; // Move last index back
>  }
> }
>
>     ```
>
>
> This code should be clear to you. It’s pretty easy to rewrite it in terms of pointers:
>
> ``` C++
> void reverse_array(int * A, int N) {
>   int * first = A, * last = A + N - 1;
>   while (first < last) {
>     swap( * first, * last);
>     first++;
>     last–;
>   }
> }
>     ```
>
>
> Look at this code, at its main loop. It uses only four distinct operations on pointers ‘first’ and ‘last’:
>
> -   compare pointers (first < last),
>
> -   get value by pointer (\*first, \*last),
>
> -   increment pointer, and
>
> -   decrement pointer
>
>
>
> Now imagine that you are facing the second problem: Reverse the contents of a double-linked list, or a part of it. The first code, which uses indexing, will definitely not work. At least, it will not work in time, because it’s impossible to get element by index in a double-linked list in O(1), only in O(N), so the whole algorithm will work in O(N^2). Errr…
>
> But look: the second code can work for ANY pointer-like object. The only restriction is that that object can perform the operations described above: take value (unary \*), comparison (<), and increment/decrement (++/–). Objects with these properties that are associated with containers are called iterators. Any STL container may be traversed by means of an iterator. Although not often needed for vector, it’s very important for other container types.
>
> So, what do we have? An object with syntax very much like a pointer. The following operations are defined for iterators:
>
> -   get value of an iterator, int x = \*it;
>
> -   increment and decrement iterators it1++, it2–;
>
> -   compare iterators by ‘!=’ and by ‘<’
>
> -   add an immediate to iterator it += 20; <=> shift 20 elements forward
>
> -   get the distance between iterators, int n = it2-it1;
>
>
>
> But instead of pointers, iterators provide much greater functionality. Not only can they operate on any container, they may also perform, for example, range checking and profiling of container usage.
>
> And the main advantage of iterators, of course, is that they greatly increase the reuse of code: your own algorithms, based on iterators, will work on a wide range of containers, and your own containers, which provide iterators, may be passed to a wide range of standard functions.
>
> Not all types of iterators provide all the potential functionality. In fact, there are so-called “normal iterators” and “random access iterators”. Simply put, normal iterators may be compared with ‘==’ and ‘!=’, and they may also be incremented and decremented. They may not be subtracted and we can not add a value to the normal iterator. Basically, it’s impossible to implement the described operations in O(1) for all container types. In spite of this, the function that reverses array should look like this:
>
> ``` C++
> template < typename T > void reverse_array(T * first, T * last) {
>  if (first != last) {
>    while (true) {
>      swap( * first, * last);
>      first++;
>      if (first == last) {
>        break;
>      }
>      last–;
>      if (first == last) {
>        break;
>      }
>    }
>  }
> }
>
>     ```
>
>
> The main difference between this code and the previous one is that we don’t use the “<” comparison on iterators, just the “==” one. Again, don’t panic if you are surprised by the function prototype: template is just a way to declare a function, which works on any appropriate parameter types. This function should work perfectly on pointers to any object types and with all normal iterators.
>
> Let’s return to the STL. STL algorithms always use two iterators, called “begin” and “end.” The end iterator is pointing not to the last object, however, but to the first invalid object, or the object directly following the last one. It’s often very convenient.
>
> Each STL container has member functions begin() and end() that return the begin and end iterators for that container.
>
> Based on these principles, c.begin() == c.end() if and only if c is empty, and c.end() – c.begin() will always be equal to c.size(). (The last sentence is valid in cases when iterators can be subtracted, i.e. begin() and end() return random access iterators, which is not true for all kinds of containers. See the prior example of the double-linked list.)
>
> The STL-compliant reverse function should be written as follows:
>
> ``` C++
> template < typename T > void reverse_array_stl_compliant(T * begin, T * end) {
>  // We should at first decrement ‘end’
>  // But only for non-empty range
>  if (begin != end) {
>    end–;
>    if (begin != end) {
>      while (true) {
>        swap( * begin, * end);
>        begin++;
>        if (begin == end) {
>          break;
>        }
>        end–;
>        if (begin == end) {
>          break;
>        }
>      }
>    }
>  }
> }
>     ```
>
>
> Note that this function does the same thing as the standard function std::reverse(T begin, T end) that can be found in algorithms module (#include ).
>
> In addition, any object with enough functionality can be passed as an iterator to STL algorithms and functions. That is where the power of templates comes in! See the following examples:
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > v;
> // …
> vector < int > v2(v);
> vector < int > v3(v.begin(), v.end()); // v3 equals to v2
>     ```
>
>
> int data\[\] = { 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31 };
> vector< int > primes(data, data+(sizeof(data) / sizeof(data\[0\])));
>
> The last line performs a construction of vector from an ordinal C array. The term ‘data’ without index is treated as a pointer to the beginning of the array. The term ‘data + N’ points to N-th element, so, when N if the size of array, ‘data + N’ points to first element not in array, so ‘data + length of data’ can be treated as end iterator for array ‘data’. The expression ‘sizeof(data)/sizeof(data\[0\])’ returns the size of the array data, but only in a few cases, so don’t use it anywhere except in such constructions. (C programmers will agree with me!)
>
> Furthermore, we can even use the following constructions:
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > v;
> // …
> vector < int > v2(v.begin(), v.begin() + (v.size() / 2));
>     ```
>
>
> It creates the vector v2 that is equal to the first half of vector v.
>
> Here is an example of reverse() function:
>
> ``` C++
> int data[10] = {
>  1,
>  3,
>  5,
>  7,
>  9,
>  11,
>  13,
>  15,
>  17,
>  19
> };
> reverse(data + 2, data + 6);
> // the range { 5, 7, 9, 11 } is now { 11, 9, 7, 5 };
>
>     ```
>
>
> Each container also has the rbegin()/rend() functions, which return reverse iterators. Reverse iterators are used to traverse the container in backward order. Thus:
>
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > v;
> vector < int > v2(v.rbegin() + (v.size() / 2), v.rend());
>     ```
>
>
>
> will create v2 with first half of v, ordered back-to-front.
>
> To create an iterator object, we must specify its type. The type of iterator can be constructed by a type of container by appending “::iterator”, “::const\_iterator”, “::reverse\_iterator” or “::const\_reverse\_iterator” to it. Thus, vector can be traversed in the following way:
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > v;
>
> // …
>
> // Traverse all container, from begin() to end()
> for (vector < int > ::iterator it = v.begin(); it != v.end(); it++) {
>  * it++; // Increment the value iterator is pointing to
> }
>     ```
>
>
> I recommend you use ‘!=’ instead of ‘<’, and ‘empty()’ instead of ‘size() != 0′ — for some container types, it’s just very inefficient to determine which of the iterators precedes another.
>
> Now you know of STL algorithm reverse(). Many STL algorithms are declared in the same way: they get a pair of iterators – the beginning and end of a range – and return an iterator.
>
> The find() algorithm looks for appropriate elements in an interval. If the element is found, the iterator pointing to the first occurrence of the element is returned. Otherwise, the return value equals the end of interval. See the code:
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > v;
> for (int i = 1; i < 100; i++) {
>  v.push_back(i * i);
> }
> if (find(v.begin(), v.end(), 49) != v.end()) {
>  // …
> }
>
>
>     ```
>
>
> To get the index of element found, one should subtract the beginning iterator from the result of find():
>
> ``` C++
> int i = (find(v.begin(), v.end(), 49) - v.begin();
>    if (i < v.size()) {
>      // …
>    }
>     ```
>
>
> Remember to #include in your source when using STL algorithms.
>
> The min\_element and max\_element algorithms return an iterator to the respective element. To get the value of min/max element, like in find(), use \*min\_element(…) or \*max\_element(…), to get index in array subtract the begin iterator of a container or range:
>
> ``` C++
> int data[5] = {
>  1,
>  5,
>  2,
>  4,
>  3
> };
> vector < int > X(data, data + 5);
> int v1 = * max_element(X.begin(), X.end()); // Returns value of max element in vector
> int i1 = min_element(X.begin(), X.end())– X.begin(); // Returns index of min element in vector
> int v2 = * max_element(data, data + 5); // Returns value of max element in array
> int i3 = min_element(data, data + 5)– data; // Returns index of min element in array
>
>     ```
>
>
> Now you may see that the useful macros would be:
>
>
>     #define all© c.begin(), c.end()
>
>
>
> Don’t put the whole right-hand side of these macros into parentheses – that would be wrong!
>
> Another good algorithm is sort(). It’s very easy to use. Consider the following examples:
>
> ``` C++
> vector < int > X;
>
> // …
>
> sort(X.begin(), X.end()); // Sort array in ascending order
> sort(all(X)); // Sort array in ascending order, use our #define
> sort(X.rbegin(), X.rend()); // Sort array in descending order using with reverse iterators
> ````
